hey guys this series of videos began
with a very light-hearted tone a lot of
joking around and a lot of laughter on
camera I think in part two you got to
see my my girlfriend Melissa really
breaking down laughing quite often and
with this video the fourth in the series
apparently from now on 51% of all the
videos on my channel will be direct
replies to Canada jin-san in this video
I don't think there's going to be a
single laugh or a single punch line so
it's become more and more serious and I
think the two sides of the debate have
indeed disambiguated what is there about
if you are an internet atheist watching
this video I want to start by pointing
out to you that my position is in a
subtle and profound way different from
anything you've seen on YouTube before
because I'm not an atheist
I'm a nihilist my problem with Islam my
problem with the Catholic Church
my problem with communism is not with
particular beliefs but with believing
itself
I'm not merely a critic of the
principles espoused by any one of these
ideologies I'm a critic of ideology I'm
a critic of a view of the world that
proceeds from principal from matters of
principle so in the most recent reply
I've received in Canada gin-san she's
just doubling down on her position as
already stated in this debate she writes
to me saying quote thank you for the
video but she fails to see why it is
relevant to talk about racism in a
certain country the actions of
individuals she argues do not reflect
the religion do not reflect the
principle of the thing
now the position she's adopting here is
in no way unique to Islam the contrast
between what I have to say and what she
has to say as a proponent of Islam is a
hundred percent identical to the
position I'm in as a nihilist when I'm
debating communists and that's been a
huge factor in my life both
because the type of research I've done
and simply where I've lived I've lived
in post-communist countries like
Cambodia and have lived in countries
that are still communist today like Laos
it's very easy for the defendant of any
one of these ideologies Islam communism
Catholicism or even American imperialism
the American Empire or even Israel it
might make some Muslim why some Muslims
watching this video might be very
uncomfortable with recognizing that the
type of rationale they're engaging in
here works just as well in providing
excuses for the modern nation state of
Israel as it does in making excuses for
the religion of Islam but the difficult
principle thing to get at here when
you're dealing with believers
face-to-face is to get them to recognize
that the mode of reasoning they're
engaged in is insincere although they
feel piously that it's the most sincere
thing they can say or feel or events
that in fact it is an excuse making
mentality it's not even a sincere mode
of reasoning Canada gin-san is inviting
me to believe that the principle of the
thing is more important than the
particular people who espouse the
principle and that is the diametric
opposite of what I believe I do not
think it's possible to look at massacres
that were carried out under the orders
of Lenin Lenin was one of the dictators
in Russia following after the Russian
Revolution Congress revolution in Russia
I do not think it is possible to look at
those massacres and dismissed them in
the same way the canidius and dismisses
massacres in history of Islam in the
same way the Ken Johnson dismisses the
history of slavery and Islam in the same
way that she dismisses the historical
reality and current present-day reality
of racism Islam she dismisses all these
things by referring to the purity of the
principle the matter of principle now
what we soon learned in practice is that
this principle is something anyone can
invent for themselves
and that even when they're claiming it's
something they've discovered written in
an ancient text that it's something
immutable that they have no role in
editing in fact they are picking and
choosing they are making an editorial
selection from that that ancient text so
so extreme that they might as well be
making up a new religion out of thin air
of course this happens with Islam
believe me it also happens with Buddhism
believe me it also happens with
Catholicism what is the principle that a
Catholic feels Catholicism represents
that can be separated from the
historical reality of what the Catholic
Church did to Native Americans to
indigenous peoples North America or hate
South America look at what's now Brazil
Chile etc the historical reality of what
Catholicism actually is what it did and
its outcomes is much much more important
than the principle of the thing and the
problem is again the principle the thing
is so malleable it's so easily
reinvented in the minds of believers we
could claim that there is some
immaculate principle for the Catholic
Church that is in no way besmirched in
no way stained by the mirror historical
reality of what the Catholic Church did
in South America or in North America for
that matter that genocide mirror
genocide mere massacres mere crimes
against humanity mere slavery mere
racism in no way touches the principle
of the thing not of what the Catholic
Church is but of what it ought to be the
problem I have here is with the very
mode of thinking that proceeds from as
its first premise a delusion not about
what the world is but of what but what
the world ought to be a mode of thinking
that takes principles as something more
real than reality itself historical
reality is precisely what we must
proceed from we can't as with the laws
of GM
three start on a chalkboard to draw out
sketch out how a bridge is supposed to
work how a bridge is supposed to support
the weight of a train as it goes across
a chasm on the cart we simply simply put
politics does not proceed geometrically
from a set of principles on a chalkboard
instead we're in a situation where we're
looking at it we're looking at a bridge
that collapsed and a whole bunch of
people who died when the Train went over
that bridge and collapsed and then on
the other side of the world in a totally
different political context totally
different cultural context people tried
to build the same bridge using the same
blueprint and it collapsed and lots of
people died and somewhere else on the
other side of the world people use the
same blueprint the same principles and a
bridge collapsed on and we're standing
there looking at the rubble trying to
figure out trying to put together
rationally an explanation for what went
wrong what am I talking about here if
you're Muslim watching this video please
reflect on whether or not these excuses
you make for the principle of the thing
whether or not you would extend these
principles to the history of communism
within Afghanistan Afghanistan today is
a Muslim country in a semi colonial
relationship with the United States of
America before that it was a Muslim
country under the rule of independent
Muslim extremists you guys probably know
that part of the story there was a time
there was a time when Afghanistan was a
communist country would you make these
same excuses for communism being good in
principle being good in its intentions
despite the disaster that happened under
communist rule in Afghanistan meanwhile
on the other side of the world with no
particular connection to Afghanistan you
can look at the reality of a communist
society in North Korea you can look at
the reality of a common study society in
Laos in Vietnam in Cuba in South America
to some extent we have completely
independent cultural examples
even just the contrast between Russia
and China their respective experiments
with communism it's astounding how much
they have in common it's astounding the
extent to which different people in
different cultures at different times
took this same blueprint try to build a
bridge and it collapsed and among the
features of that collapse were racism
genocide persecution of ethnic
minorities and yes of course mass
starvation topics I'm not going to get
into in this video during the life of
vladimir Ilyich Lenin I will give you a
link below this video to an essay I
wrote about it you can read about
unbelievable I really mean that
unbelievable massacres and persecutions
of Jews within Russia under Russian
communism I think the very first group
to face ethnic cleansing to face
genocide 'l repression in russia right
after the communist revolution were the
cossacks that's no joke it's a really
terrible chapter of history and
repression of ethnic groups
extermination of ethnic groups this was
a feature of communism again and again
in diverse places around the world
actually I've heard Muslims complained
that Muslims themselves were persecuted
by communism within Cambodia another
interesting chapter in this in this
history the treatment of Muslims by
communists in some cases would you
accept what Canada jin-san says here in
defending Islam in defending communism
in defending Catholicism or indeed in
defending the modern nation-state of
Israel or the American Empire abroad
what Canada Jensen says is that the
actions of individuals in no way impugn
the principle of the thing they no way
touch the reality of what their religion
is and from my perspective that is the
fiction of what the religion ought to be
can you not recognize that there is a
principle the United States was pursuing
when it bombed Vietnam Cambodia and Laos
can you not recognize that there are
people who to make a principled defense
of the United States military in its
actions whether in the devastation of
Laos the devastation of Cambodia or
examples that this audience may be more
familiar with the conquest of
Afghanistan the disaster of the
interaction of Iraq if you will say yes
yes yes but what America represents can
never be known from a particular
historical figure like George W Bush or
Abraham Lincoln or George Washington no
no no they can defend this by claiming
there's a principle here and there's a
principle that they insist they alone
can define by working from some sacred
text whether that text is the
Constitution of the United States of
America or the Communist Manifesto that
there is some sense in which they will
claim the beliefs and conduct of
vladimir Ilyich Lenin Lenin the dictator
of Russia that the conduct of Joseph
Stalin dictator of Russia that they are
conduct or misconduct the outcomes of
their decisions are something that you
need to understand as completely
separate from the principle of what
communism is itself the principle is
nothing what you're being asked to do in
this mode of thought is to disregard
everything and focus your attention
exclusively on nothing what can we learn
from the historical reality of actually
existing communism everything it's
profound it's baffling it's unbelievable
I'll give this link to this article I
wrote about a chapter of history I'm
sure none of you have heard before it's
a fascinating chapter of history in East
Asia where Russian communists did carry
out anti-semitic massacres they did
carry out anti-japanese massacres and
they carried out anti Cossack massacres
there was ethnically insane going on
there was starvation there was chaos
that unbelievable violence under
communism by studying that
example the unfolding of these
historical particulars we can learn so
much that's valuable and by disregarding
those details to instead focus on the
principle of what communism ought to be
we learn nothing and indeed from my
perspective the religious mentality is
one of the same whether the example is
the Catholic Church in South America of
the Russian Empire or the Russian
Revolution communism or what have you
or if we're looking at Islam and the
rarely discussed question of the history
of Islam and slavery and racism in
Mauritania now some of you will claim
that there's something really
significant but working from the primary
source texts here sometimes there is I
mean is it is significant if you want to
understand the American bombing of
Vietnam is it important to read the
American Constitution well yes sure you
can understand a lot of things about
American politics
conversely if someone said to you no no
the American Empire is not racist just
look at the US Constitution there's
nothing in there about bombing Vietnam
there's nothing in there about
Vietnamese people and lotion people
being not equal to Americans that is
ridiculous
when you're trying to invoke the secret
purity of this source text to disregard
the reality the very complex reality of
racism in a context like the United
States trying to conquer Vietnam trying
to conquer Cambodia trying to cover your
loss is racist was racism a factor in
American foreign policy towards Vietnam
Cambodia Laos yes it was a factor is it
the only factor did they start those
wars just because they're racist no of
course not
okay is racism a factor in understanding
the reality of Mauritania today is
racism and important factor is racism
and important factor in understanding
Islam as it actually exists in
Mauritania today is racism an important
factor in understanding the role of
Islam in slavery in martini today yes no
it's not a complete explanation you're
not just gonna say well people are
racist therefore that's the whole story
of course of course it's an important
factor
is it possible for people to focus on
the mere facts of history so much so
that they exclude or ignore important
questions of principle maybe that is
possible maybe it's possible for someone
to focus on the reality of the United
States using torture in Vietnam Laos and
Cambodia to focus on the use of torture
so much the practical reality the
historical reality of what the Unites
States didn't torture people that they
ignore questions of principle that they
ignore the fact that United States
Constitution it says that America's
against torture I've never known anyone
who had that problem I've never known
anyone who was so invested in the mere
facts of what actually happens in
history and planet earth did they ignore
those questions well on the contrast
heard me on the contrary I think those
people tend to be deeply involved in
drawing our attention to the contrast
between those statements of principle
the United States claimed it would never
use chemical weapons who would never use
biological weapons and they did they
claimed they would never engage in this
kind of torture and they did etcetera
etc it's those people who really care
with that on the contrary the problem I
see again and again is people who want
to lead us down the rabbit hole the
rabbit hole of the true believer of the
ultimate conformist the Canada Gen
Sana's has gone down here who want us to
believe in the principle of the thing
primarily exclusively they want us to
believe so much in the principle of the
thing that were willing to disregard a
thousand years of history that were
willing to disregard the world as it
actually is just for the sake of our
pious hope our pious belief in the world
as it ought to be and that plays out the
same way whether your belief is in what
communism is what it ought to be or the
American Empire is an ought to be or
Islam or Judaism as it exists in the
modern State of Israel today the
difference between myself and other race
of the atheists on the Internet or
to myself and these true believers is
much more extreme than you might at
first believe I describe myself not
merely as a nihilist but an historical
nihilist many people will tell you to
study history just to learn the lessons
of history and ultimately that's not my
point here at all I think that people
who sincerely study any of these
episodes in history any of these
ideologies any of these collapsed
bridges if you like to use my former
image the point is not that they just
examine one collapsed bridge and come to
the conclusion this was a disaster
I think that with time with real depth
of understanding with profound
introspection and examination
examination of the human condition and
the reality of each of these disasters
that ideology leads to I think that the
study of history itself is profoundly
incompatible with belief I think that a
true appreciation for what history is
and for how human beings who have the
best of intentions human beings who tell
you sincerely that in the colonisation
of Canada they were going to set up
schools for the forced assimilation of
the indigenous people the enforced
simulation of First Nations indigenous
people Native Americans American Indians
we're going to say the Cree the Egyptian
there are people who will tell you still
to this day so sincerely that what they
were doing in principle was bringing
civilization and literacy to people who
had none of their own people who were
not civilized and who were illiterate
and on the level of just examining the
principle of the thing
it isn't that easy to believe in isn't
it easy to support such a positive pious
principle that is presented to you as a
way of helping people and isn't it so
much harder to examine the disconnect
between those positive human intentions
and the unbelievably horrible human
outcomes isn't it so much harder to
learn from the reality of what history
really is
but when we do that one disaster or
another residential schools in Canada
forced assimilation of indigenous people
whether in Canada or in the Soviet Union
under communism there are parallel
situations with them forcibly
assimilating the native people it's
amazing the extent to which in a
Christian and a secular context human
beings can reinvent many of the same
evils when we learn from history what we
learn I think finally you know maybe not
even in your first 10 years of learning
from history but finally inexorably
inevitably what we learn is that there
is nothing to be believed in that all
beliefs are false that all beliefs are
dangerous that we can't look amongst the
rubble of one of these collapsed bridges
to find the good and pure principles of
geometry that were once written on a
blackboard that what we can do and what
we must do is learn from historical
reality historical reality is all we
have but in that rubble the tremendously
hopeful and the tremendously positive
thing is human mutability is the
potential for positive change that
knowing what we know now if we don't
disregard the reality of what went wrong
in Mauritania the reality of what we're
not wrong in Ontario Canada or Canada
ginseng comes from the various disasters
genocide and worse that we can learn
from from history of the Catholic Church
in history of Islam from the history of
communism that it would be so easy for
us to do better next time that for me is
the sense in which nihilism is endlessly
optimistic compared to any particular
belief believers end up trying to cling
to one principle or another they end up
trying to defend that principle the
imaginary purity of their principle
against the unbelievable historical
reality of what happens when that
principle was put into practice again
and again
again nihilists instead get to look
around at the rubble and say hey I'm
just doing it trying to do something
positive here what can I do
that'll make a positive difference and
the answer the answer is something not
nothing
whereas belief makes you beholden to an
abstraction that is in truth worse than
nothing at all